---
date: 2025-09-09
draft: false
title: '"Aerial Navigation" by John Wise, found in the January 08, 1870, issue of Scientific American (1870)'
url: sa-jan-08-1870
images:
  - images/032-sa-jan-08-1870/title.jpg
tags: ["aeronautics"]
categories: ["Engineering", "Aeronautics"]
---
John Wise (1808-1879) was a pioneer of ballooning and made many important contributions to the field. A more comprehensive background on Wise will be presented in a future post. This article written by Wise was originally published in the January 8, 1870, issue of *Scientific American* and is presented below in its entirety. In it, Wise discusses the possibility of using currents of trade winds to make trips from America to Europe. James Bell Pettigrew, who is quoted at the beginning of the article, was a Scottish naturalist and aviation pioneer perhaps best known for his book *Animal Locomotion, or, Walking, Swimming, and Flying, with a Dissertation on Aeronautics*.

<p><h6>Dr. James Bell Pettigrew, in a discourse before the Royal Institute, of Great Britain, on the subject of Aeronautics, said, among other things: "In order to construct a successful flying machine, it is not necessary to imitate the filmy wing of the insect, the silken pinion of the bat, or the complicated and highly differentiated wing of the bird, where every feather may be said to have a peculiar function assigned to it; neither is it necessary to reproduce the intricacy of that machinery by which the power in the bat, insect, and bird is moved; all that is required is to distinguish the power and extent of the surfaces, and the manner of their application, and this has, in a great measure, been already done. When Vivian and Trevithick constructed the Locomotive, and Symington and Bell the Steam Boat, they did not seek to reproduce a quadruped, or a fish&mdash;they simply aimed at producing motion adapted to the land and water, in accordance with natural laws, and in the presence of living models. Their success is to be measured by an involved labyrinth of railroad, which extends to every part of the civilized world, and by navies, whose vessels are dispatched, without the slightest trepidation, to navigate the most boisterous seas, at the most inclement seasons.</h6></p>
<p><h6>"The aeronaut has the same task before him, in a different direction, and, in attempting to produce a flying machine, is not necessarily attempting an impossible thing. The countless swarm of flying things testify as to the practicability of the scheme, and nature at once supplies him with models and materials. If artificial flight were not attainable, the insects and birds would afford the only examples of animals whose movement could not be reproduced. The outgoing and incomings of the quadrupeds and the fish are, however, already successfully imitated, and the fowls of the air, though clamorous and shy, are not necessarily beyond our reach. Much has been said and done in clearing the forest and fertilizing the prarie&mdash;can nothing be done in reclaiming the boundless regions of the air?"</h6></p>
<p><h6>Certainly we can, if we begin right! As the first sea-ships were not made to be propelled by steam and paddle-wheels, but to be drifted leisurely on the water before the winds, I propose to inaugurate a system of aerial navigation on the unpretentious principle; namely, drifting in the currents of the trade winds to such points and places as are within the known province of the resources of aeronauts. We have, in this Northern Hemisphere, a system of trade wind currents, at present so well authenticated and understood as to be acknowledged by the leading scientific institutions of the world as established meteorological facts, of daily recurrence; and I have practically explored them time and again for thirty years past. In the temperate zone these currents blow from the southwest and the northwest, overlapping each other and producing, between them, a compound or eddy current, blowing eastward.</h6></p>
<p><h6>In the spring and in the autumn these two great currents form conjunctions, and produce, for some days, those violent gales termed equinoctial storms, continuing until the balance is restored between the going and the coming of the trade winds, circulating between the equatorial and polar regions. The lower portion of the lower stratum of these currents&mdash;that is, the one from the northwest, is all the time, more or less, sliding off toward the south, and gradually curving round until it reaches the intertropical regions, where it is recognized by mariners as the northeast trade wind; and here, meeting the more rapid motion of the earth’s surface from west to east, as well as the equitorial heat, it is whirled westward and upward and, and pressed outward, as it ascends, producing the great upper current from the southwest; and thus the northwest current has become the southwest current.</h6></p>
<p><h6>On the other hand, our southwest current is all the time passing off a portion of its upper surface to the north, until it reaches the frigid zone, where it sinks down and becomes the northwest trade-wind current, underlapping the upper current, and, by its friction against the latter, producing what I term the eddy current, blowing nearly direct toward the east.</h6></p>
<p><h6>Thus, we have, within the practical capability of the ordinary air ship, the means of reaching any place east, northeast, or southeast from the place of departure in our latitude.</h6></p>
<p><h6>It is an easy matter to sail from Philadelphia, New York, Boston, or Baltimore, to St. Petersburg, London, Paris, Madrid, Lisbon, or Gibraltar, or to any point within that range of latitude, as it becomes simply a matter of constructing an aerocraft that is capable of floating in these currents of the atmosphere for a few days, and we know that air ships can be constructed that will retain a sufficient buoyancy for many days. Napoleon the First had one constructed and used, that ascended with its practicing army pupils thirty days after its inflation&mdash;time sufficient to circumnavigate the globe with an air-ship.</h6></p>
<p><h6>The change of dimension of the bulk of the inclosed gas by change of temperature between day and night, is to be compensated by a balance rope. When the sun increases the levitating power of the air float, it will soon find its equipoise in lifting from the surface of the sea, or the land its equivalent of the balance rope, and its loss by the coolness of the night by giving back to the land or water its equivalent of weight.</h6></p>
<p><h6>I have practiced this current sailing for over thirty years, more or less, made over 400 voyages&mdash;from 100 to 1,000 miles in length&mdash;and never failed to find these trade-wind currents when an altitude of 5,000 to 12,000 feet was attained, although at these times currents from opposite directions frequently prevailed on the surface of the earth. An air vessel of 100 feet diameter, two thirds filled with coal gas, would have a net carrying power of 9,000 pounds, and would be all sufficient for a practicing machine with a view to sound these currents across the ocean and to test the practicability of establishing an air line of mail and passenger conveyance from this country to Europe. Pleasure seekers and invalids would find it a swift and easy voyage from America to Europe&mdash;no sea-sickness and less than three days to make the voyage.</h6></p>
<p><h6>This is certainly a feasible plan for the inauguration of aerial trips, and is seriously worthy the attention and application of the enterprise and genius of the present day and in our own nation. A little barometrical practice in the scheme would soon teach us how to lay our lines for a successful system of trans-Atlantic aerial navigation.</h6></p>