---
date: 2025-07-15
draft: false
title: '"Flying Machine", found in the December 23, 1848, issue of Scientific American (1848)'
url: sa-dec-23-1848
images:
  - images/026-sa-dec-23-1848/snippet.jpg
tags: ["aeronautics"]
categories: ["Engineering", "Aeronautics"]
---
This article begins with a statement from the editor (presumably) that "many a poor fellow has lost his life by his fool hardy confidence in some machines he had invented to ride upon the winds" but, despite failures and deaths, "there are still to be found new flying machines coming out every few months." The description of one such machine was given in the *The Pontiac Jacksonian*, a local newspaper published weekly in Pontiac, Michigan. An excerpt of that original article was printed in this issue of *Scientific American* and is reproduced below. The original author is unknown, as are his background and training. It is unclear what some of the numbers below are based on.

"As wings then, have failed, and balloons been attended with no better success, men have begun to think that the end is unattainable, and that flying is a victory which man can never achieve.

"The art of flying simply consists in the suspension and motion of a heavy body in a lighter. Although this may appear contrary to the nature of things, it is what takes place every day, and is seen exemplified in the case of every insect and bird that flies&mdash;all of which are heavier than the air. A bird is a species of flying machine, heavier than the air, but moving about independently, and yet as safe and as certain to remain suspended as an inflated balloon would be. If a condor, which weighs many million times as much as a mosquito, flies with ease and rapidity, why should not some still more huge machine traverse the air with equal facility?

"To accomplish the end desired, we have but to keep in view the cause of a bird's flight. It is simply this philosophical axiom&mdash;that, circumstances being the same, a greater force must overcome a less. If the weight of a bird be as 1, and its mechanical appliance for counteraction be as 2, the bird will rise from the earth when its powers are exerted. Herein is all the mystery of flying; and if a bird or machine weigh ten tons, and have mechanical apparatus for acting upon the air with a power of twenty tons, the machine must certainly rise. This is the only condition requisite, and so long as it is kept in view, and the resistance of the air in bodies of different velocities ascertained, the capability of heavy bodies to fly may be made a subject of mathematical certainty.

"In regard to power, taken in connection with the space occupied, there is no form of artificial wing equal to the screw or propeller wheel. While the wings of a bird alternately draw in and strike out, the power of a screw is constant and unvarying. The power with which a given diameter of screw wheel, making a certain number of revolutions per minute, will act upon the air, can easily be determined by experiment, and the elevating force of any number of wheels can thus be ascertained. Having accomplished this, we shall know exactly how much weight can be raised, and can construct and load our machine accordingly.

"Let us suppose a machine to be constructed resembling a long railway car, with arms projecting at certain distances from the roof and floor, appearing like the long axles of a wagon wheel. At the extremeties of these arms the axles of the screw wheels or wings are inserted, which thus work parallel to the earth, instead of perpendicular, as in a vessel. At the stern of the car are from two to four wheels, to serve as propellers, the side wheels being merely to elevate and suspend the car. In the interior of the car, at the centre, is the steam engine, with the fuel and water, while the extremeties are reserved for passengers and baggage. The wings are moved by independent bands connected with the internal machinery, so that the whole or a portion of them may be used at once, for the convenience of ascending and descending.

"Unlike the heavy railway car, the frame should be constructed of wrought iron, and the roof, sides and floor be covered with thin sheet iron or copper, suitably supported by light frame work where necessary. The wheel wings should be constructed in the same manner&mdash;strength combined with lightness being always kept in view. Steam engines are now constructed of great lightness and power, and we have not arrived at the precise epoch when the great feat of navigating the air can be accomplished.

"This machine instead of having two wings like a bird, will have from four to twelve, according to the length. The forward end should be built sharp, to offer less resistance to the wind. Having more wheels than are necessary to its elevation, no danger can occur from any accident that may occur to one or two of them. The machine can be guided by some kind of rudder, or by stopping one or two of the stern wheels, which are attached to each side of the stern.

"At first sight, such a machine as this may appear the production of a visionary, but the same would have been said fifty years since had any man described a locomotive engine and a railway. Every step towards the construction of this machine can be based on mathematical principles. The air furnishes a vast fund of power for the use of mankind, although as yet they have only used it to propel ships and wind-mills. We live in an age of great discoveries and improvements, and among these will certainly be ranked the navigation of the air. The most distant voyages, overland may be accomplished with expedition and little cost by these machines, all that is necessary being wood and water, which are abundant on this continent.

"A car forty feet long, with five wheels on each side, eight feet in diameter and three smaller propellers at the stern, would certainly appear a novel object, when roaring along through the air. If a certain breadth of wheel be not sufficient, try broader ones&mdash;if the velocity be too slow, increase it. Let those who have capital and science devote their mite to the cause, and a great victory will be accomplished."

The editor ends the article with skepticism, saying that "Every artificial object that can float in the atmosphere must be lighter than its bulk of the atmosphere." However, the editor wishes the inventor success and hopes that "he won't forget the law that was discovered by the great Newton in the falling of an apple."