---
date: 2026-03-19
draft: false
title: "Two articles about Thomas Walker in the July 17 and 24, 1830, issues of Mechanics Magazine (1830)"
url: mechanics-magazine-july-1830-walker
images:
  - images/056-mechanics-magazine-july-1830-walker/article.jpg
tags: ["walker", "aeronautics"]
categories: ["Aeronautics"]
---
In July of 1830, two issues of *Mechanics' Magazine* contained descriptions of Thomas Walker (author of *A Treatise Upon the Art of Flying*) and his flying machine. The July 17, 1830, issues contains a description of a machine Walker built. The article, titled "Review of Papers on Flying," is a continuation of an article first published on January 23, 1830, and continued in the January 30 and June 12 issues of the same year. The author is James Harrison of Barton-upon-Humber. Harrison was a bellfounder and church clock-maker (see more on [The Whiting Society's site](https://www.whitingsociety.org.uk/old-ringing-books/harrison-introduction-treatise-bells.html)). Harrison has the following to say about Walker:

"Several years ago a gentleman of the name of the Walker, a portrait-painter at Hull, conceived an idea of the possibility of flying. He published a short treatise on the subject ... but which not exciting any one to the attempt, he determined to decide upon its practicability himself. He caused a car to be made three feet wide to sit in, with wings moving on joints, and firm supports for the feet to prop against, so that the whole body might be most effectively exerted in giving motion to a lever, standing up in the midst of the car at a convenient distance from the seat of the aeronaut, for him to lay hold of, and which was attached to both wings by connectors to an arm from the axis of the lever, which was placed at the bottom of the car. The wings were 12 feet long each, by about 6 feet broad, so that the extend of the machine was 27 feet. The mode of applying the power was undoubtedly as well devised as the thing would admit of; nevertheless, he was unable to raise himself from the platform on which the car was placed. The impossibility of flying by means of wings might, however, have been ascertained without trial. The effect of wings being most considerable near their ends, where the motion is greatest, and the more especially as the resistance is as the square of the velocity, we cannot estimate the point of central effect (or that point in which, supposing the whole resistance to be concentrated, the effect would be the same as if spread over the whole surface), at a less distance from the axis or joint of the wing than three-fourths of its length, viz. 9 feet: therefore, admitting him to pull the lever through a space of 2&#188; feet with effect, then as such pull must needs be greater than the weight of the machine, and its contents in the proportion of 9 to 2&#188;, it follows that on a moderate estimate of his weight and that of the machine&mdash;say 2 cwt. in the whole&mdash;he must exert a force of 8 cwt. with a smart motion merely to lift himself and the car off the platform for a moment. The framing of the wings was partly of wood and partle of whalebone, and was closed with silk in narrow screeds with whalebone springs, to open for the air to pass through in their upward strokes. By the bye, it is a mistaken notion that the air passes through the feathers in the upward strokes of the wings of birds. Their flight being continued in a straight line, proves that their weight is sustained by their wings the same in their upward as their downward strokes. In the upward stroke, the after-edge of the wing being somewhat lowest, the rapidity with which they cut the air occasions it to bear hard underneath, by which the weight of the bird is sustained; and in the downward stroke, the after-edge being a small degree highest, necessarily propels the bird forwards, but apparently without increasing its support; since, in this situation, the air has a less tendency to bear against the under-side of the wing: and it is certain that were there the least difference in the weight sustained between the upward and downward strokes of the wings, birds could not keep a straight course, but must alternately rise and fall, which they are observed not to do. What then must have become of Mr. Walker during the time of raising his wings on the principle of letting the air pass through them in their upward strokes? Had he actually been aloft in the air, he must have descended a great distance ere he could have made a succeeding stroke! We know that there is no intermission in the action of gravity, and that the moment any thing ceases to be sustained, the same moment it begins to descend; and should it take only one second to raise the wings, he must in that interval fall 16 feet, abatement being made for the resistance of the air; if two seconds, then 64 feet, &c."

Harrison ends by saying that "Mr. Walker's wings were much too small to support a man in air; so that although there were really no want of power, they would have been found inadequate." The article written by G. W. of Regent-street and published a week later paints Walker and his machine in a more positive light. He writes:

"Being one of those who, as well as Mr. Harrison, was favoured with an inspection of Mr. Walker's flying apparatus whilst building, I beg to offer a few observations on the subject. The inventor is a gentleman of great talent, and very unassuming, although highly communicative. I can readily imagine, however, that he would be reserved even before men of ingenuity, calculated to appreciate so extraordinary an undertaking; and still more so in the presence of the critic, the wit, or the more heavy part of mankind, who are too tiresome to instruct. Those who saw the model when it was finished (for it was only a slight fragile machine for an experiment) expressed their great astonishment, and were confident of its answering the intended purpose. The wings were allowed to be large enough, and there was sufficient power to work them; but an alteration to make the power more compact was deemed desirable. It was in the year 1810 this experiment was tried; a time when our country was nearly distracted with politics, rather than engaged in cultivating the arts and sciences; and there was not a single spirited individual to come forward with any pecuniary assistance in so certain and grand an undertaking. About two years since, I had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Walker in town, when I was delighted to hear that he had made some improvements, and that his plan might be demonstrated at pleasure."

G. W. goes on to say that "the treatise is out of print, very scarce, has created considerable interest throughout Europe, and is of the greatest importance to facilitate the attainment of the object in view." A full description of Walker's treatise and his life can be found [here]({{< relref "post/001-walker-on-flying/index.md" >}}).